[somber music playing]
-All right. Down.
-[Liz grunting]
Oh, my God.
It's him. Townsend.
You should go. There could be others.
[Dembe] I'll call Edward. Tell him
to have a medical team standing by.
-Can you walk?
-Walk?
Townsend's dead.
I could fly.
[grunting]
The bullet went clear through.
No organs were damaged. She'll be fine.
Thank you. Have yourself a drink.
Make it a double. You deserve it.
You deserve it too.
You won.
I wish there was time for celebration.
But Mother Nature and the criminal world
quickly exploit a vacuum.
We should set a time to see Harold.
Call Dr. Clemons.
Thank him for his services
and tell him they're no longer necessary.
-Did you find another doctor?
-No.
You're giving up.
Why? You just said
there's a fight to be won.
There is.
But it can't really be won
unless I'm gone.
Perhaps I will have that drink after all.
Toast to better days.
Will it end when I know?
When Reddington's told me the last of it,
will I be able to live a normal life?
What is normal?
Not this.
We live the lives we are meant to live.
I understand you blaming Raymond
for how yours turned out.
I blame him too sometimes.
But fate takes the laboring oar.
In our lives and his.
Fate and destiny.
Ah! You're up. Excellent.
I have a bit of a surprise for you.
-Mommy!
-Hey!
Oh, pumpkin. What are you doing here?
[Agnes] It was Pinky's idea.
Pinky?
He says his name is Red,
but I prefer pink.
I thought she'd be just the thing.
And as it turns out, Mrs. French and I
share a great love for Jacques Tati.
Oh. [chuckles]
-How are you, my dear?
-I'm better now. Thanks to Pinky.
-Oh, Mr. Reddington!
-Aram. Nice.
[in high-pitched voice] I heard
about Townsend. We're so relieved.
What's the celebration?
Who's getting well?
Oh, these are for Agent Ressler.
He's off the ventilator.
-The doctors say he's doing much better.
-That's good news.
Care for a toke?
I'd give almost anything to hear you talk
like a member of the Lollipop Guild.
[chuckles]
[knocking on door]
Come in.
What a relief. Knowing the threat
to Agent Keen is gone.
[in high-pitched voice]
We're all quite happy
with the way things turned out, Harold.
And here I thought Aram was
the only man-child around here.
Please tell me you're above such things.
[in high-pitched voice] I think it's
childish and completely unprofessional.
[in normal voice] Please indulge
our weakness for life's simple pleasures.
We've come bearing dark tidings.
You wanna tell me,
or you'd like finger-painting first?
[chuckles] I would.
More than you can possibly imagine.
But, unfortunately,
Townsend's death is about to trigger
a firestorm of criminal activity.
In the absence of a clear successor,
everyone will be vying
for control of his empire.
I assume you're here to give me a case.
That the next name
on the Blacklist will be in service
to help you take advantage
of this situation.
I do have a bunch of likely contenders
for the throne.
And I am giving you them so that someone
can take advantage of this situation.
-But not me.
-How magnanimous.
I've heard
that one's true colors emerge at the end.
I'd love to think
that magnanimity is one of mine.
The end? I knew you were sick, but...
Exactly how bad is it?
Harold, over the years,
you've served
as a wise counselor to Elizabeth.
I'd like to know that in my absence,
that would continue.
Raymond.
How sick are you?
Do I have your word?
Of course. I'll always do
everything I can for Elizabeth.
Thank you. You're a good friend.
[door opens]
Is this really necessary?
It's the best way I can think of
to ensure her protection.
Your blood tests are better.
The treatment is working.
You're getting better, not worse.
I'm dying. Whether it's this year
or the next doesn't matter.
What I've got doesn't go away.
It just takes a pause, regroups
and comes back stronger.
Deadlier.
Where's Agnes?
Mrs. French took her to the park.
Thank you for bringing her here.
That was very thoughtful.
The conversation we've been having--
Or trying to have.
About who I am
and why I came into your life.
How my mother got you to watch over me.
Your mother. Yes.
She foresaw this moment.
The answers are here.
In a letter she wrote to you.
[dramatic music playing]
Why do you have a letter
my mother wrote to me?
For when the time was right
to let you know the truth.
I think we can both agree
it's long past time.
-One condition remains.
-No. No conditions.
One task.
Then it's done.
What could possibly be left for me to do?
To take my life.
What do you mean?
I mean literally and metaphorically.
I'm dying.
You've known for a while that I'm sick.
Before I die...
I need to make sure you're protected.
And how will killing you do that?
By showing the world
you're a force to be reckoned with.
That you did what no one else could.
No law-enforcement agency,
no criminal rival.
You found and executed Raymond Reddington.
You know
I don't wanna take over your empire.
I do.
And under other circumstances,
I wouldn't want you to.
But Neville Townsend learned
certain things about me.
Things that we should assume
others now know as well.
I'm afraid that people will come for you
just like Townsend did.
It took all of our strength to fight him.
You'll need help to fight the others.
This is the way to get it.
It's quite a story.
Full of...
ambition and hope.
Love and loss.
How does it end?
You'll find out.
[jazz music playing over speakers]
[Liz] Oh, you're so cute!
[sighs] I could just squeeze you
like this forever.
Where's Pinky?
[Liz] You know,
I don't know where Pinky is.
I never quite know
where Pinky's gonna show up next.
He's funny. He tells me stories.
Oh, yeah? What kind of stories?
About a Russian princess.
She doesn't want to be a princess,
but other people keep telling her
it's her destiny.
What do you think she should do?
Mom. She's a princess! [giggles]
[Liz] I got train tickets for 4 p.m.
I'll meet you at the station.
I got some people I wanna say goodbye to.
It won't take long to close up
the apartment in New York.
We'll sleep on the jet and be in Europe
by this time tomorrow.
This will be so good for you two.
To get away from it all.
Yeah.
I hope so.
We've had some times.
We have.
[car horn honks]
Get in.
-Have you spoken to Reddington?
-I knew he was sick,
but I had no idea it was this severe.
[dramatic music playing]
He asked me to take over for him.
I'm not surprised.
I said no.
I'm leaving.
We're gonna get away.
I wanted to tell you in person.
And thank you
for everything that you've done.
So your mind's made up?
About taking over for Reddington?
Is there a decision to make?
There's so much I want for you.
Above all, I want you to be safe.
Right now, you're a fugitive
on the Most Wanted List.
If you took over for Reddington,
inherited the Blacklist,
I could probably convince Panabaker
to give you immunity.
You'd be protected,
you'd have a reason for taking over
that you could feel good about.
We could still work together.
Taking over for Reddington has risks.
Physical and emotional.
Both of those concern me.
But you not doing it concerns me more.
-How's Ressler?
-On the mend. Worried about you.
Yeah, I wanna see him.
Probably safer to call.
Yeah.
Where's the fun in that?
Hey.
I heard you're feeling better.
Well, I am now.
I've got a decision to make.
Cooper's wrong.
He called you?
You're not like Reddington. You're better.
You're good.
Too good to do what he wants you to do.
I don't feel good.
You're not a criminal.
Pretending to be one won't keep you safe.
[tender music playing]
[Cooper] Russian mob.
Serbians. Italians. Chinese.
And a few Americans
and Brits thrown in for good measure.
All did business with Townsend.
According to Reddington, all want a piece.
Mr. Reddington doesn't?
He wants us to move on the United Nations
of Crime so he can take over.
But not for himself, for Elizabeth.
So she can take over.
-That's not funny.
-It wasn't meant to be.
But she can't.
I mean, even if she could, she wouldn't.
-Would she?
-[Park] Why would he let her?
What would he do, go play golf?
Reddington's sick. He wouldn't say
with what, but it's clearly terminal.
Wait. Mr. Reddington? But...
He always seems so invulnerable.
He isn't. Neither is Elizabeth.
If she decides to take over
for Reddington, she'll need our help.
Starting with a workup
on the people in this folder.
I'm in the chairs next to the escalators.
Okay. I'll see you soon.
[suspenseful music playing]
[girl] Excuse me?
I'm sorry. I don't mean to stare.
Are you Agent Keen?
Elizabeth Keen?
Do we know each other?
Beth Ryker.
Daniel Ryker's my dad.
General Ryker.
He said not to take it off.
Oh, my God. It can't be you.
I think about you all the time.
What you did.
-Ah...
-You saved my life.
You were a very brave little girl.
You probably don't remember
the story you told me.
About the scar your dad gave you.
How it was your secret weapon.
Whenever I'm feeling sad or afraid,
I just touch it like this
and it makes me brave.
Wanna see if it makes you brave?
-[device beeping]
-Yeah?
[beeping stops]
I left the bureau.
What do you do now?
I'm... trying to figure that out.
[man on PA] The Keystone Service 3:45 to
Philadelphia, now boarding on track nine.
Keystone Service...
That's my train.
I can't believe it was really you.
All aboard.
Thanks for saying hello.
My dad told me
that if you hadn't defused that bomb,
thousands of people would have died.
Most people just,
I don't know, live their lives,
but you made the world a better place.
So whatever you decide to do,
I really hope you'll keep doing that.
[suspenseful music playing]
[cell phone buzzing]
Elizabeth.
Tell him I want to meet.
Hear him out.
Okay, hold on.
She wants to discuss your proposal.
Okay.
Tell her we're in New York.
Can you meet in New York?
I'll text you.
[cell phone beeps]
Is it wrong? What I'm asking her to do?
[Dembe] It's not that simple.
Right and wrong have never
been simple in your life.
You love her
and you want to keep her safe.
You're desperately trying to do that.
I wonder if it makes any difference.
Hi, baby. Who's ready to go to New York?
[solemn music playing]
[Dembe] Raymond.
[Raymond] Ah.
Elizabeth.
Thank you for coming.
I understand you've given
some thought to my proposal.
I have.
And...?
I need you to explain something to me.
Please.
If we go through with this,
if I actually do this...
what makes you think it's gonna work?
Me. As your heir.
Why do you think
people are gonna accept that?
They'll accept it
when I'm dead in the street.
because you're a criminal.
Is that what I am?
Or is that what I am because of you?
I've considered that question...
so many times.
How things might have
been different if I had never...
re-entered your life.
Would you be safer?
Happier?
Was it my presence alone...
that brought you to this crossroads?
Or maybe none of that ever mattered.
Maybe you were born to this.
Out of a lie, the daughter of a spy,
genetically predisposed
to deception and danger.
I don't know.
I've thought and thought about it.
And I just don't know.
What I do know is that...
whether it's chance,
or karma, DNA or fate,
or just bad luck...
this is where you are now.
This is who you've become.
A criminal.
A fugitive.
And taking my life...
is a way forward.
Humor me.
How would it work?
[pensive music playing]
The restaurant's been undergoing
renovations for over a year now
and will be opening soon.
But first, Pascual's having
a little soiree for family and friends.
Tomorrow night.
I'll be there, as will Dembe.
We'll have dinner, see some friends.
By one o'clock,
I suspect things will be winding down,
the families will be gone.
I'll say my goodbyes and exit,
Dembe will stay back to thank Pascual,
you'll be waiting
in your car parked down the street,
with a clear view of the entrance.
It should happen on the sidewalk,
right in front of the restaurant,
and happen fast.
By the time the police respond,
you'll be long gone.
I'm quite sure Pascual will have
to show them to the CCTV footage.
And, of course, it'll be leaked.
And within hours,
the image of you standing over my body
will be on the front page
of every major newspaper in the world.
-You've really thought this through.
-Yes.
Tomorrow night.
Yes.
-What?
-[snickers]
Of all the times
I've wanted to kill you...
I don't think I can pull the trigger.
Let's not worry about that.
Not now.
Let's just...
be.
["Somewhere Only We Know" playing]
That sounds nice.
♪ An empty land ♪
♪ I knew the pathway
Like the back of my hand ♪
♪ I felt the earth ♪
♪ Beneath my feet ♪
♪ Sat by the river
And it made me complete ♪
♪ Oh, simple thing ♪
♪ Where have you gone? ♪
♪ I'm getting old
And I need something to rely on ♪
♪ So tell me when you're gonna let me in ♪
♪ I'm getting tired
And I need somewhere to begin ♪
♪ I came across ♪
♪ A fallen tree ♪
♪ I felt the branches of it
Looking at me ♪
♪ Is this the place we used to love? ♪
♪ Is this the place
That I've been dreaming of? ♪
♪ Oh, simple thing ♪
♪ Where have you gone? ♪
♪ I'm getting old
And I need something to rely on ♪
You said you made a promise to my mother.
That you'd dedicate your life
to keeping me safe, no matter what.
I did.
Why?
Who was she to you?
♪ Why don't we go ♪
♪ Talk about it somewhere only we know? ♪
This photo.
There was someone standing
behind the lens, holding the camera.
Was it you?
You were there, weren't you?
I was there.
You knew her well.
Better than anyone.
♪ Oh, simple thing ♪
♪ Where have you gone? ♪
♪ I'm getting old
And I need something... ♪
Fine.
♪ So tell me when ♪
I'll do it.
♪ You're gonna let me in ♪
♪ I'm getting tired
And I need somewhere to begin ♪
Okay.
But in exchange,
I have to ask you a question,
and I need you to give me
a straight answer.
Okay.
You said I can't see my mother's letter...
that I can't know who you are until
after you're gone, when my future is cast.
Yes.
Why?
Why can't I know who you are
until after you're dead?
Because if you knew,
you'd never agree to kill me.
[pensive music playing]
Let's go through it again.
We've been through this.
Please?
The evening ends, you go.
I hang back to thank Pascual.
Elizabeth will be waiting down the street.
St. Vincent is the responding hospital.
Our man on the inside will handle
transport via their ambulance.
The city will never
take possession of your body.
And the remains?
Spread over the Yenisey.
Raymond, we've been through this.
And then you get what's yours. All of it.
-Yes.
-No less.
Yes, I know, Raymond.
Are you sure about this?
Elizabeth is a fugitive.
The only way for her to survive
this world is to become part of it,
to become bigger than it,
stay ahead of it.
And you're prepared to die
to make that possible?
I'm always prepared to die.
[cell phone jingling]
-Hello?
-[Liz] Aram, it's me.
Liz.
Listen, I don't have much time.
We may have a lead on some criminals
moving in to pick over Townsend's legacy.
Good. I hope you get them.
Mr. Cooper thinks you should replace
Mr. Reddington, Ressler doesn't.
If you're looking for a vote
to break the tie, I'm with Ressler.
-I know, that's not why I'm calling.
-I won't help you.
I know I have in the past... but I won't.
I wouldn't expect you to.
That's not what I want.
What I want... what I'm hoping for
is that you can find it
in your heart to forgive me
for the things I've done,
for what I'm going to do.
What I have to do.
[line disconnects]
I just spoke to Liz. Um...
She asked for my forgiveness.
Given her choice,
that's perfectly understandable.
-Agent Park, have you reached Reddington?
-No. And I called his restaurant.
Somebody answered,
said they're opening in a few days,
but tonight's a private party.
When all this began,
I was such a different person.
Blinded by passion and inexperience.
What we built...
it's been fulfilling in ways
that I can't even begin to describe.
It's been a wonder.
Thrilling and challenging.
A blessing and a curse.
Whatever it's been...
it's become who I am.
But at some point,
it became clear to me that I wasn't...
really in control of any of this.
I thought I was.
At times, I feel like I am.
But I'm not.
No matter how much I try
or care or give of myself...
I have no control
over how any of this ends.
And that is...
crushing, if I think about it too much.
So I don't think about it.
I ignore it, deny it.
And try to convince myself that
I can keep Elizabeth safe, Agnes safe,
which is why I--
I feel I have to do this.
I have to believe that I can help.
Because the alternative is just...
I understand.
I know you do.
Only when I'm gone.
Give it to Elizabeth
but only when I'm gone.
You ready?
-No.
-Me neither.
Let's go.
[Agnes] What's wrong, Mom?
Oh, nothing. I'm just--
I'm just sad.
But I'll be okay.
We had such fun in New York, didn't we?
Why are you sad?
Well, uh...
[solemn music playing]
someone that I care about is sick.
He's...
very sick.
-Did he see a doctor?
-No.
Unfortunately, the doctors can't
help him get any better.
Is he gonna die?
Yeah, honey. He is.
That is sad.
I know.
But I think
my friend is trying to be brave.
I think he feels fortunate.
[Agnes] What's "fortunate"?
[Liz] Well, I think my friend knows
he's lived a good life.
That he's seen a lot of neat
and different places...
and he has a lot of friends that love him.
-Dembe, will you stop the car, please?
-What's the matter?
I want to walk.
-It's not safe.
-I'll meet you at the restaurant.
[Liz] So...
even though he's sad he's gonna die...
he feels fortunate
that he's lived a good life.
Your friend's blessed.
Yeah. Blessed.
Where did you learn
a word like that, smarty?
[Agnes] You always say that even though
Daddy had to go to heaven,
he was okay with that
because he felt blessed to know me
when I was a little baby.
[Liz] Yeah.
I think
my friend feels blessed like Daddy.
I feel blessed because of you.
Oh, honey.
Me too.
I'm blessed because of you.
Don't forget, no matter what happens,
I love you to the moon and back.
I love you too. More than hearts.
One more sleep, okay?
I'll see you in the morning.
[indistinct chatter]
[Ressler] I spoke with Keen myself,
she turned Reddington down,
said she was gonna leave the country.
I think she already left.
Except she hasn't.
Elizabeth phoned Aram. She's in D.C.
She also asked for his forgiveness.
Forgiveness? For what?
Your guess is as good as mine,
but I fear it has something to do
with Reddington positioning her
to be the heir to his criminal empire.
So he convinced her.
-Now they'll need to convince the world.
-I don't follow.
[Ressler] You and I both know the people
who work in Reddington's world
aren't gonna accept Keen's taking
the reins just because he announced it.
If he wants her to be taken seriously,
if she's gonna be respected in his world,
she's gonna have to make a statement,
demonstrate her value.
Which is why she'll need
Aram's forgiveness.
Agent Ressler, I'm putting you
on speaker with Park and Mojtabai.
-Whoa. Hey, hey, good news.
-Hey, what's that?
What do you mean?
You're alive, that is incredible news.
-I thought you were not gonna make it.
-Thankfully, he did.
Do we have any updates?
I still can't reach Reddington,
Dembe or Agent Keen.
Oh, my God, that's it.
He's not gonna make it.
She's gonna kill Reddington.
[Aram] Wait. Who is?
Keen. She's gonna kill him.
She's gonna make a statement,
demonstrate she's no longer an agent.
Kill Mr. Reddington?
[Ressler] That's how
she's gonna prove to the world
she's seizing control of his empire.
She'll do it in public. She'll--
She's gonna kill him.
[Cooper] Reddington was here,
talking about his death,
about taking care of Elizabeth
when he's gone.
Wait, back up, you think
Reddington knows this is happening?
I think it's his idea.
The party. At the restaurant.
That son of a bitch is gonna
sacrifice himself to save her life.
We have to get to him,
convince him to call it off.
["Keep Watch" playing]
♪ And fill your arms wide
With all the sanity ♪
♪ You wish you could steal ♪
♪ Just think how it used to feel ♪
♪ Before the sadness
And the fear had drilled ♪
♪ A hole right through you ♪
[Pascual laughs]
To Raymond. For his friendship and support
to make this dream come true.
♪ Keep watch over me ♪
♪ We're scared to believe ♪
♪ All the things that we read ♪
♪ Minds desperate to feed ♪
♪ Veins aching to bleed ♪
♪ Voices will secede ♪
♪ Minds sick with disease ♪
♪ Just three words I will need ♪
♪ Smog wash over me ♪
[speaking indistinctly]
♪ And let all the voices repeat
On and on, endlessly ♪
♪ We can run until the work's complete ♪
[Raymond] Salud, my friend.
To Raymond.
♪ But what if our fate is to be choking ♪
♪ On the lives we lead ♪
[song ends]
[tender music playing]
I can't do it.
That's all right.
I don't want to.
I understand.
-[gunshot]
-[impact thuds]
[inaudible dialogue]
Raymond.
Raymond, we have to go.
Raymond, we must. I'm sorry.
[closing theme playing]